--------------------

I never ever imagined I would be homeless. Never. From having a beautiful home, three beautiful kids, never thought, no, never thought I'd find myself in this situation. Never. Never in a moment. Never.

Homeless women in Australia are the women we know. Our mothers, our aunties, our neighbours, our sisters. It can happen to anyone. I was 65 when suddenly everything imploded and I thought I had all my ducks in a row. In fact, I thought I could keep working forever. But it's a fact of life that ageism exists in the workforce and it's just if you don't have money coming in, you can't pay your rent. And so in no time at all, I was homeless, basically, yeah.

Being brought up in a Chinese family, it's like mum says, you're just married and just serve your husband and your husband will take care of you for life. And then he started drinking heavier and heavier and we lost the house, lost everything. He went his way, I went my way. And then I was hit with third stage cancer. I was six months at my brother's. He and my sister-in-law, they were very kind. And then my sister-in-law kind of gave me the warning that, you know, her parents are coming to live with them, so I have to move out.

On the day when I moved, I had nowhere to go. I just had my car and my stuff. So I kind of thought, where do I go? So then I slept in a car. I was really zombied in a sense that I really don't know what's happened to me. And I didn't know what to think and I didn't know what to do. Anyway. No one to turn to, so...

It is absolutely life-altering for an older woman to find herself homeless. They often can't even say the word, I am homeless and I need assistance. You have that feeling of shame. Shame in being homeless is shame in asking for help.

I had three kids. The ex cheated all the time. He cheated on me from day one. But being in the Italian background, I had to sort of stay there and take it. I left him after 33 years. I lost super, I lost money, I lost everything. And family can only help that much, not that they don't want to. Well, yes, I didn't want to trouble my children. But it's my pride. That's me.

I was in between staying with friends in Sydney and I slept in my car for two nights with my cat. Thank God I had my cat. It's a heartbreaking part of homelessness that it's now impacting on people who don't need support. They just need somewhere that they can afford to live in and so that they can go on and start living life as they should be.

The beginning of my homelessness journey began when I became redundant. I was not on any waiting list. I didn't even think of putting myself on a waiting list. I really didn't think it would be an issue to re-enter the workforce again, but it was. Once it spiralled down, it just go down, down, down, down, down so quick. It could happen in weeks, not even months, weeks.

The time frames for social housing in NSW are over 10 years, but that could be anything close to 20 years. For someone who is in their 50s, 60s and 70s, that is a very, very long time to wait for safe, secure, affordable housing.

On the 9th of October, I got a phone call saying that they'd found this place. I came here, I had a look, I opened the door, had a look, and that's it. And I said, yes, straight away. I am so appreciative of being here in women's housing.

The solution to homelessness is more housing. It is as simple as that. We need at least 50,000 social housing dwellings over the next 10 years to meet even current demand. I'm thankful every morning when I wake up. I'm thankful that I think of all the people out there who don't have a home.

Homelessness, it does not discriminate as to who it touches and what socioeconomic background you have, whether it's domestic abuse, whether it's from, in my case, financial and health combination. It could be from a divorce. It does not discriminate. Anyone can find themselves in that situation.

------------------------------------

After losing her council tenancy, Sandy’s life became chaotic with homelessness and addiction. Living in hostels and sometimes on the streets, she faced constant challenges with safety and mental health. Her journey took a positive turn when she found support from St Mungo’s. This is her story.

Before St Mungo’s, life was chaotic because I was drinking and using drugs. I couldn’t go to appointments, I couldn’t meet people, I felt completely isolated in all my chaos and it affected my mental health. When I lost my council tenancy, I went into the hostel system, which felt like being homeless and sleeping rough because the hostels are really rough and it didn’t help with my addiction — it just spiralled out of control. As a woman, I felt more unsafe in the hostels because you meet other people that are using as well. There’s lots of rows and fights and trying to keep yourself apart from that is really hard. It’s just a dangerous situation. I try not to get involved.

I’ve slept rough on the street too. When I moved in with my ex-partner, he was violent. When he got drunk and out of control, he’d throw me out and I’d be on the street all night, trying to find somewhere safe to sleep without getting attacked. When it was cold, it was really horrible. I tried to find a blanket, maybe a sleeping bag and use that to cover me up overnight. I have mental health issues so I’m not allowed to be on the street —they have to house me somewhere. So I ended up back in the hostel system for a long time. I was still with my partner then, so I’d go in and out, sometimes for just a night and this happened loads of times over ten years.

Then I was introduced to St Mungo’s in 2014. I was in a hostel when they came to me and said, “Can we help you?” I needed help, so they supported me. The only time I really wanted to get better was recently when I went into rehab. Because I had engaged with support before, I was able to get into rehab. When I got clean this year in May, things got a lot better.

I’ve been reflecting on what I’ve been through every day now. It feels good. I’ve come out of those bad situations and even though I’m not in an ideal place — I’m in a hotel at the minute and don’t like it much — but I say to myself, as long as I get my head on that pillow, I’m clean and sober, just for today. That’s another day I can add to my sobriety. If I could give advice to my younger self, I’d say don’t drink or do drugs, don’t get into violent relationships, stay clean and your life will get a lot better. You just have to work with the system to reach your goal, which is a tenancy and maintaining it.

Right now, I’m in groups and activities to keep myself busy. I like hearing other people’s stories — it helps me think about where I’ve come from. I’m doing an IT course and have just completed two modules. Even though I’m a slow starter, I’m learning and at my age, it’s pretty good. I might start a bakery or flower arrangement course on Fridays to fill my week and I’m looking forward to that. There’s also a peer mentoring course I want to do so I can be a mentor to other addicts. It’s important to me because it’s giving something back; I can only keep what I’ve been freely given. So if I can help someone else, it makes us both feel good.

St Mungo’s has supported me with lots of things like getting me to appointments and helping with my letters. If I’m having a bad day, I can phone them and they’ll support me, maybe take me for coffee to chat and see what’s going on with me. Last Christmas, they bought me a Christmas tree, so I could feel festive in the flat. It’s not all about council or benefits — they take us out, we come together as a community and we all go for Christmas dinner, which is nice.

I get different workers over time but I’m never left without support. I’ve worked with Aly for five or six years. A couple of years ago when I lost my flat, I got cuckooed by drug dealers and I didn’t know where else to turn. I phoned Aly and they sorted it all out for me and put me in a safe house. I know if I’m ever in trouble, they’re there. Sometimes I just call to chat and they always ask how I’m doing.

I’m looking forward to getting a new flat and mentoring people, then take it from there. Getting my head on the pillow clean and sober tonight means I’ll be okay for tomorrow. I’m looking forward to Christmas, but I don’t know where I’ll be.

To those who donate, thank you. You give us hope and courage to go on. If it weren’t for St Mungo’s, I don’t know where I’d be, so that fiver will go a long way.

------------------------- 3

Gary was referred to St Mungo’s after a family breakdown led to the loss of his home and struggles with his mental health issues led him into addiction. Here is his story. 

“I became homeless for the same reason a lot of people do: childhood trauma and a relationship breakdown. My mum was an addict and she died a couple of years ago, my dad was an alcoholic and I haven’t seen him since I was nine. I saw a lot of nasty stuff, and you take that into your relationships. I became homeless not long after I had a baby with my partner. I wouldn’t stay with friends much because I felt ashamed. I was sofa surfing and I slept in derelict garages; I’d been in the building game from a young age, and you can just tell where’s empty. Sometimes I slept in people’s cars. Once someone caught me when I’d slept in an old fridge.  

I was put in a hostel around Kew, and it was all shared rooms. I’d never dabbled in heroin but the guy I was sharing with, as soon as I moved my bag in, he was chasing the dragon. Through depression I ended up doing it with him. He got a place in Peckham and I ended up sofa surfing at his for eight months, riding my bike to work in Twickenham. You’re their best friend until there’s no drugs about, then they want you out. It’s not his fault, he’s got mental health problems as well. It’s hard to see a way out. 

I wasn’t well; I heard voices. Work dried up and I admitted myself to hospital. I was in there for a couple of months and I needed to get housed, I didn’t want to live like that anymore.  

Things turned around for me when I got my flat and I made a conscious decision to stop using every day. I did my own detox for a month. I was referred to St Mungo’s for the construction course. I already had the skills, but in the Job Centre just want to pump you back into work; they don’t take into account what you’ve been through. But here you pick up skills you forget: communication, routine, camaraderie, responsibilities, timekeeping, and just being in that social environment again.

I volunteered for a year, painting St Mungo’s properties. I treated it like a job, getting into the routine again, getting up early, working, camaraderie. It’s a friendly environment and they want the best for you, straight away. They want you to go out and get what you deserve, if you put the work in.  

I’m about to start a training course putting cladding on new-build tower blocks. Two weeks in the college and five weeks on site, and there should be a job prospect at the end of it. It’s good money as well. I’ll be working until my retirement.  

I was in addiction and dealing with trauma, and I had a plan. I wanted to get off drugs, keep my flat, get a job, get a dog, raise her for a year and then come and do this. And I did it. I’ve got a little staffie called Tia, she’s a rascal. And it’s not just about me anymore, it’s about her. 

The most valuable thing I’ve got from St Mungo’s is a sense of wanting to go out there and get back into my career, and make money. I’d be dead or in prison now if it wasn’t here. And now I’ve got a job to look forward to hopefully. I’m not going to go back to that lifestyle.” 

---------------------- 4

After her employer passed away, Nicky found herself facing homelessness. Finding pet friendly accommodation was proving impossible, until she met St Mungo’s.  

I was made homeless during the pandemic. I was caring for a lady, and the job came with a flat, because she needed 24 hour care. But when she passed away, and I lost both my job and the flat. Suddenly, I had nowhere to go, through no fault of my own.  

I also had Foxy, who had been the lady’s dog. None of the accommodation I was offered accepted pets, but I didn’t want to be without him – it would be like losing a family member. And I think he would feel lost without me too.  

It was a really stressful time, because I didn’t know what was going to happen. I thought I was going end up on the streets.  

Eventually, I was evicted, and the council placed me with St Mungo’s. At first I had a room at one of the hostels, but now I’m in my own self-contained flat, which is part of St Mungo’s supported accommodation.  

It means a lot to be able to live here with Foxy. We’ll get up in the morning, and go for a walk in the park. Then we come back and have breakfast, and he sort of snoozes all day while I’m cleaning or whatever. Then we go for our afternoon walk. It’s a good routine, and it’s nice to meet other dog owners. 

There’s plenty of support here if you need it – the staff are really helpful. It’s like a little community, but at the same time you don’t live in each other’s pockets. I sometimes get involved with the activities – they run things like games night, gardening and cooking.  

When I first arrived, I didn’t know what was going to happen. Or how long I’d even be here. But now I feel much more positive. My case worker is helping me to apply for housing and I’m hoping to get a flat of my own. Don’t get me wrong, this place is lovely. I’d be happy here for a good long while, but obviously it’s is meant to be temporary. Because there’s lots more people who need support too. 

------------------ 5

David struggled to get the support he needed and slept rough for nearly 20 years. Then he was offered a flat of his own through St Mungo’s Housing First, and things started to click into place.  

Six years on, he’s living a busy, fulfilling life with his pet dog, Star.   

“When I was younger, I started having addiction problems. I was working as a care worker and had my NVQ, but I’d become quite dependent on alcohol, and I was kicked out of home just before my 21st birthday.   

“From then on, I lived on the streets for about twenty years. I stayed in a few hostels but they just didn’t work out.  

“I used to sleep out by Hyde Park corner. Right on the cuff of Westminster, and Kensington and Chelsea. One night, an Outreach worker called Chloe came along, and told me I had the chance to get a flat.  

“She offered me a place in a night shelter and told me to meet her the next day at 11am. She told me all about the flat, and Westminster Housing First, which is run by St Mungo’s.  

“Housing First is basically the idea that instead of waiting until people are “ready” for their own home, you offer them a home first – as the first step to recovery. This was a new service in Westminster, and I could be the first client. 

“12 other people went to look at the flat and we had to do interviews, to make sure the person could sustain it. I had to stay at the night shelter whilst I was applying – which was hard because it wasn’t a good environment for me to be in. But I stuck with it, and after ten days, I found out I’d got it. 

“It was strange at first. I wasn’t used to having a roof over my head or having keys in my pocket. In fact, when I first moved in, I locked myself out and had to get a locksmith! 

“But it’s really worked. Because before, I never had my own space, or my independence – I was either on the streets or in hostels. This is the first time I’ve had my own flat, and I have to pay my own bills. 

“I meet my lead worker, Ben for coffee once a week. He supports me with all sorts. He recently helped me to get my benefits assessment sorted out. The anxiety can really set in with things like that, it can feel quite heavy. But he helped me with the assessment and that’s a big weight off my shoulders.  

“It’s not just about helping with problems, though – St Mungo’s helps me with the social side of things too. I go to the Recovery College, I do lots of walks, and I’m doing the Client Challenge in Dorset this year. They do community building days once a month, and organise trips to places like London Zoo.  

“It’s good because one client might be feeling down, but they see oh, you’re doing good. And that encourages them. 

“Compared to when I first moved in six years ago, I feel like a million dollars. I’ve got stability in my life, I’ve got friends and now I’ve got Star, my dog.  

“Star used to live with my friend, Keith, but she’s been with me for about four years. She’s full of energy, and very bubbly. She just loves people.  

“I sometimes get anxiety and depression, and if I’m feeling a bit low, Star picks up on it. She’ll jump up and give me a cuddle. And that helps me because I know that I’ve got to take responsibility, that she needs a walk. She needs to run, she needs to be fed and watered.   

“Battersea Park is only down the road, so we love going there. And Battersea Dogs & Cats Home is close by, so I volunteer there sometimes too. I even went over for the fireworks on New Year’s Eve.  

“I’d definitely recommend St Mungo’s to other people. They’ve helped me so much, and I’ve come such a long way.  

“To anyone who is in the position I was in, I would say don’t give up hope. I was once in your position, but six years later I’ve got an amazing flat, I’ve got amazing friends, and I’ve got Star. Listen to the Outreach workers and support workers – they really can help you get to where you want to be.” 

---------------- 6

Experiencing homelessness on and off for several years, Caz now lives in her own flat, having been supported by St Mungo’s Outreach.

 

I was homeless on and off since I was 18. I came out of care when I was 18 and things sort of just went downhill from there.

I slept in doorways, places like that. I was robbed a few times while I was asleep.

I saw someone get stabbed on the street over £2. I’ve heard stories of girls being attacked. It was a horrible experience.

Things like that could happen to anybody. I’d always sleep by main roads and it lit areas to avoid any danger.

I used to have people come and offer me money for sex but I’d always say no. When you’re on the streets people just see you as a piece of meat and not as a human.

It was hard trying to stay clean. Not being able to shower or bath when I wanted.

I first came into contact with St Mungo’s through Outreach. They gave me a phone to contact them and it went from there. Now I’m living in my own flat.

St Mungo’s have helped me in lots of ways; they helped me get my bed and my furniture. Now I have a cooker and a washing machine, I have a full kitchen and I have great key workers.

It’s great now to have my own place. I feel a lot safer.

Sleeping on the streets is terrifying, but I’m lucky to be here.

--------------- 7

Staying in a pet friendly hostel really helps Lisa. Her mum’s dog, Marnie keeps her company and helps her stay motivated.

I started sleeping rough after leaving care at 16. I had been going to the West End in London with an older girl since I was about 13, and it was always exciting. There were all these older adults and I thought they were looking after me. One day, they said “do you want to try some crack?”, so I said yes. I didn’t have a clue what it was, but it was nice, and I carried on doing it. Then I started begging and shoplifting to get the money for it. So when I was 16, I left the children’s home legally and went back to the West End to sleep on the street.

A group of us used to sleep down by Leicester square. There was an old cinema that had shut down, and we would be in the front of the doorway. To be honest, at the time it seemed quite exciting because I’d never experienced any of that before. But as I got older, I realised it wasn’t exciting. It wasn’t exciting having to wake up and get money for drugs every morning.

I’m 38 now, and I’ve stayed in lots of hostels over the years, but this is the best hostel I’ve ever been in. The minute I walked through those doors, it’s like a proper community. You can come down for breakfast, they do wellbeing group, and the Recovery College is just across the street. They do arts and crafts and cookery groups. The managers are so friendly, and the staff will help you any way they can.

It’s really nice to be able to have Marnie, my mum’s dog here too. To be able to have a little companion. When I’m on my own I just want to stay in bed. Because I’m not using drugs anymore, I’m on methadone. But when I’ve got Marnie with me, I’m up at nine o clock. She’ll go out for a wee, have her breakfast, then we get ready and go over to the park. It’s a nice little routine we’ve got going. I couldn’t stay in all day with her, it wouldn’t be fair. She’d get bored.

I had dogs when I was sleeping on the streets too. I had Tyson, a staff, who I got as a tiny little puppy. Even when he was a baby, six months old, I felt safe with him. As soon as somebody would come close to me, he’d start barking. I ended up having him until he was really old – about 16.

But a lot of hostels won’t allow dogs in. I think, as long as the person is looking after their dog, and feeding it and not neglecting it, what’s the problem? It’s so good for people’s mental health, and to help them stop taking drugs. It definitely helps my mental health to have Marnie here now.

In future, I’d like to get my own place, with my own dog. I love staffs. I’m also trying to get into voluntary work – I want to do anything working with dogs. My support worker’s very encouraging, and he’s helping me look into it.

----------------- 8

Growing up, I lived in Hounslow, then I went into care and moved around. When I was older, I got my own flat, but I wasn’t ready. I had a few parties, the neighbours complained, and I was evicted.

I went to the council, but they told me I wasn’t a priority. I knocked on my dad’s house and said I had nowhere to go, but he shut the door in my face. And that’s how I ended up having to sleep on the streets at 22 years old.

Being on the streets, the days go by and by and by, and it’s just the same stuff every day. You think, where am I gonna go? I used to sleep behind the police station in Hounslow to keep safe. I slept in the park a few times. I even stayed in an empty house before it was demolished. During the day, I’d sit on the tube for 24 hours, riding back and forth from Cockfosters to Heathrow.

The scariest part was in the park at nighttime, there were no lights so it would be absolutely pitch black. I’d be so scared because you couldn’t see anything and I could hear noises.

As a woman, it’s 100% different. You get a lot of people offering you money for sexual favours. I used to tell them no, even though I needed the cash. But people would approach me for that quite often. Some men out there, they’ll see a vulnerable woman and use that to their advantage. I’ve seen it happen to people and it’s not nice.

A girl I knew, she was controlled by this man and he ended up sexually exploiting her. It was a bad situation. I kept telling her to leave him, but she was in love and wouldn’t listen to anyone. She said he’ll change, but they all say that, and they don’t change.

There was one lady who saw me as a daughter. She stayed on the streets with me – even though she had a house to go back to – because she didn’t want to leave me by myself.

I thank her for that all the time. She protected me because she was a lot bigger and she knew Hounslow. She’s streetwise. You’ve got certain people who know about the streets. Who’ve been on the streets. She’s that type of person.

One day, we bumped into one of her friends. She said “I’ve got a 22 year old here, can you help her?” That’s when I went and lived in the squat. It was fantastic, compared to the streets. It had electricity and hot water. But it wasn’t really safe, because obviously there was a lot of drug users doing heroin and crack. I started using crack too, because I saw everyone else doing it, and I’m easily led. In the space of two months I lost so much weight, I didn’t look healthy. I’m not proud of it.

Things changed when I was stopped and searched by the police. They told me I was wanted for something to do with a previous conviction, and I was arrested and sent to prison for six weeks.

When I came out, a prison officer met me outside. They took me to the council and explained my situation, and because I had that authority with me, they placed me in temporary accommodation.

I stayed there for a bit, but I was getting bullied, so I went back to the council. Soon after, a St Mungo’s worker called me. I can’t remember her name, but she was lovely. She said “we got a place for you.” So that’s how I came to be with St Mungo’s. They supported me. They got me some clothes, they got me some food and they said “You’re safe now.”

That’s what St Mungo’s do they keep people safe. Which is good because there are a lot of females that are homeless and people don’t know about them.

Whilst I was staying with St Mungo’s, I fell pregnant with my son, and had to move out. I tried my best for six months but social services said it wasn’t enough. I had to leave him, which was the hardest thing I’ve ever done. St Mungo’s welcomed me back at their service and really supported me, and when I had to serve another four weeks in prison last September, they visited me in prison, kept my room for me and even arranged a taxi to pick me up.

I do feel safe with St Mungo’s, because I’ve got staff to talk to if I feel depressed. If I feel down, I’ll think, come on, let’s go to the shop. Let’s get some food. Let’s do a cooking session – just to boost me up. Yesterday I cooked lasagna for the whole house. Home made garlic bread, which was a first for me, but it was easy. I didn’t realise how easy it was! I might make it again. I love cooking. I’m getting counselling too, to talk about my son, and the adoption process that’s happening with him.

I’m 29 now, and when I’ve left here, I want to do an apprenticeship to become a support worker. I want to help – because I’ve been through it all. I’ve been through self harm. I’ve been through drug abuse. I’ve been through the care system. So I reckon I’d be a good support worker, because I’ve been there. I’d be a very good advocate. Especially as a woman who’s been through homelessness.

------------------- 9

My name’s Denise, I’m disabled with a weakness on the right side of my body, and I use a wheelchair. It’s been a hard road.

I’ve been homeless on and off for a while, but five years ago I suffered an acquired brain injury after falling off a wall. Since then I’ve been moved around more than 60 hotels, and I’ve had to fight and fight to get suitable accommodation.

Before I got this flat I was sleeping rough for about seven weeks. I slept outside the hospital, or outside the train station in my wheelchair. I was vulnerable – anything could have happened to me.

The police would come and take me to A&E, then A&E would send me back out again because I’m not an accident or emergency, I’m homeless. A&E put me in their side room in the end and left me there, because I said it’s up to somebody to look after me. You cannot put me on the street anymore. Who’s duty of care is it? Police, council, or hospital? I’m not going anywhere.

Eventually, my social worker helped me to get my flat. When I was on the street anything could have happened to me. Now I can shut that front door and lock it. It’s safe. There’s nothing nicer than knowing you can lock the front door behind you and you’ve got your own stuff around you.

Sadly, it doesn’t give me my health back. I can’t get out of my front door, or the main door of the building. It’s not accessible for someone in a wheelchair. So my life consisted of getting up and going to bed.

Luckily, I was referred to St Mungo’s and they’ve really helped me. They come in as many times as need be. They help me with doctor’s appointments, and pay for my taxis. They take me to art class. I get so depressed sometimes. But they’re there, all the time. Woody, my support worker, is even helping me to get my door sorted.

Unless you’ve got a good social worker, or someone like St Mungo’s around you who can fight for your corner, you’ll be tired and just give up. I can imagine this is how lots of other people who are homeless feel. There’s never a day where it’s stress free.

------------------- 10

Michelle’s story
I’ve never got on with my family, so from the age of 14, I was always running away. As I got older, I managed to get myself back together and working, but then I lost my partner. And because I wasn’t on their rent, I ended up being homeless again in 2012.

I moved to London because I enjoy it – it’s got an energy to it. And being on the homeless scene here is better than being in a rural place, because you don’t get that much help in a rural place. There’s no resources at all.

I’ve lived in doorways, I’ve lived everywhere to be honest. The rain’s bad. People are bad. They don’t see you as what you are, or what you could be, or what you have been – they just see you as a dosser.

Men will approach you wanting something for nothing – they think you’re a sex worker, whether you are or not. They say “I’ll give you a fiver to do this.” Because you’ve got nothing. Every woman on the street is vulnerable. Put me there when I was 17 or 18 – it could have been a whole different story. Luckily, because I’ve worked in men’s environments, driving, I can handle myself. I’ve never had anyone try to overpower me – well I have – but they haven’t got very far.

It makes you feel dodgy about people all the time. You always think, “Who’s that person, what do they want?” Even if they’re just making sure you’re okay. It makes you suspicious.

I was living in the subway when the queen died. That’s when I was helped into a St Mungo’s hostel. I’ve never really done hostels. It’s a place that’s overrun by men, it is very male dominated.

But it’s actually different to what I thought it would be. You only have to go to the staff and tell them if something’s going on. You can talk to them confidentially and it gets sorted.

I found a lot of good and heartfelt things, when I started working with St Mungo’s. A lot of support. They put themselves out there. If there’s a problem, it hasn’t been like, oh it’s okay, push it under the carpet. They say “Let’s bring it to the surface, and what we bring to the surface we’re going to sort out.”

I haven’t ended up with a worker that’s not been good to me. I can’t say there’s any person I’ve interacted with who I haven’t got on with. I’ve had a good experience. They have backed me every step of the way. If I phone my support worker up and say I’m having a bad day, they will drop things just to make sure my mental health is there.

At first I was staying in an emergency room, then I ended up getting a longer term room. And from today I have an actual place to live. I’m ecstatic to be honest. If it wasn’t for staying here, I wouldn’t be getting my flat. I wouldn’t be in the position to be having a flat. I can’t fault it.

--------------- 11

Martin’s story
Meet St Mungo’s client Martin. 

Martin was a tree surgeon, but became homeless after he split up with his girlfriend, who was pregnant. 

“I was using heroin, and [my girlfriend] didn’t want anything to do with me. I ended up sleeping rough for three years and living in a tent.” 

When he was living on the streets in cold weather, Martin’s dependency on drugs became the main focus of his life:?“My mindset was all about getting drugs – I knew what time I was going to be poorly, and I had to score to keep myself well. It was no way to live, but I didn’t know how to stop.” 

Extreme cold weather then struck the UK, triggering a Severe Weather Emergency Protocol (SWEP) response. Sleeping rough in these freezing temperatures could’ve been fatal. But it was then that Martin found St Mungo’s, and was able to take his first step to overcoming homelessness. 

It was freezing, but I knew St Mungo’s were offering people a warm place to stay, so I queued up at one of their shelters and got a bed, shower, and something to eat. They have been there for me ever since. 

Martin had his last night on the streets, and St Mungo’s have been providing him with ongoing advice and support to rebuild his life. 

“Soon, I was assigned a support worker and offered a place in a hostel. My support worker helped me to access counselling to deal with my PTSD, and go to classes at St Mungo’s Recovery College. They gave me something to focus on, which helped me stop using. 

“St Mungo’s even helped me to get all of my ID back – like my birth certificate, my driver’s license and my passport – which meant I could finally open a bank account.” 

Two and a half years after meeting St Mungo’s, Martin has now moved into a flat of his own. He goes to St Mungo’s gardening classes every week and is also working towards a City and Guilds qualification. He hopes to get a job as a tree surgeon again. 

I’m so proud of how far I’ve come – I’ve got a strong foundation to build on. And I see my daughter, which is brilliant. Without St Mungo’s, that wouldn’t have happened. They really have changed my life. 

Overcoming homelessness can be a difficult journey. We are there for our clients every step of the way, from outreach, to accommodation and recovery, and?ongoing support. You can make a donation today to help more people like Martin rebuild their lives and make it their last night on the streets. 

------------------- 12

Stacey’s story
Stacey lives in our Southwark Semi Independent Housing facility, this means she only has to pay service charge, but she still has to buy food and other essentials. She has been relying on benefits for nine years, as she’s too ill to work. We spoke to her about how the Cost of Living Crisis is affecting her:

“I have been on benefits since the age of 21 and I am now 30, I remember constantly being sanctioned because I could not attend Jobcentre appointments due to my mental health being so bad.

I taught myself to budget and used to spend money on drugs and luxury items, it’s only when I moved to supported accommodation my life changed and I was determined to have a better life for myself. My shopping habits have changed so much I’m a different person now.

I am really shocked by the food prices these days. I don’t visit the local corner shop any more as it’s too expensive, I buy food and toiletries from Aldi & Lidl as it’s cheaper and often look for the yellow sticker reduced foods whenever I visit. I sometimes visit Peckham pantry to get better deals for food to make my money stretch further.

I currently have £2,000 debts and on a payment plan but it’s hard. It does get me down that on top of my mental health I have to worry about affording food. Although government has recently given extra payments, it’s not enough when everything keeps getting more expensive every month.

Life is s**t living on benefits, I think about money all the time. I have already planned to apply for emergency support grant to get heavy blankets and warm clothes. It’s not nice having to live and plan my life like this as constantly. I feel hopeless and trapped and I feel deprived of a social life – I can’t buy nice clothes. Now I think “what will be the cheapest way to buy and cook food?”. I tend to eat one main meal a day.

Last week I was offered a flat from the Council and I’m viewing it next week. Although I am really happy and excited that I am moving to my first home, I have already worked out I can’t afford to have the heating on or afford electricity. I will just live in one room over winter and buy an electric blanket as it will be cheaper than having the heating on.

I wonder how I will afford to live when I have my own home. I will be very conscious of leaving things switched on in the house. I would think twice before preparing any food in the oven as it would cost more. It’s rare for me to have a take away meal these days as their prices have gone up so much.

I am trying to save for my move on as I could get an offer of accommodation any time in the next 6 months but it’s very hard. The Government need to provide more financial help to poorer people and those that are too ill to work.”

We are facing a once in a generation cost of living crisis which will affect the poorest the most.

---------------- 13

Chloe’s story
Chloe is 26 years old, and lives in our Southwark Semi Independent Housing facility. One day, she wants to live in her own accommodation but at the moment she’s not well enough to work. We spoke to her about how the Cost of Living Crisis is affecting her:

“Today I feel angry, really angry telling you what it’s like to live miserably on such a low income. It’s not fair I am trying everything I can to turn my life around but things that are beyond my control has an impact on my hopes, my dreams, my aspirations.

Oh my God the food prices these days are shocking. I receive £308.00 a month Universal credit, £21.00 is being deducted for fines. 3 days after getting paid I will have spent all my money paying my rent arrears, food, essentials. I have a savings account but never been able to save more than £10.00 and often dip in to these tiny savings because I have no choice.

My mental health is significantly affected worrying about money. I get paid on the 30th of each month and since 30.08.22 once I have bought food and paid rent I only have £18 to live on until next benefit paid on 30.09.22. I only have £7.00 left on my Oyster card which I save for emergencies.

I rely on my Dad a lot financially and often go food shopping with him as he would rather assist than see me go to a food bank. My family feels it’s a stigma to use food banks, I don’t think like that and thinking of getting membership with Peckham pantry so I can buy more food at a reduced rate. I am really good at baking and for me this used to be a therapeutic hobby which I can’t indulge in anymore as the price of ingredients is so expensive. A typical food shop that used to be £20.00 is now £35.00. I don’t eat many massive meals, and for a while just survived on jacket potato and cheese. I buy all my toiletries from discount stores.

Month to month I can’t afford everything I need so regularly miss out on things I need. Walking long distances is my daily life now, I visit different supermarkets to buy the cheapest reduced items. If I can’t eat it by sell by date I will freeze it. I have not had a holiday for 4 years, not even to travel somewhere with my family in England. I can’t afford to help my Dad out or spoil my niece. I feel I am borrowing all the time just to get by.

Living like this is making me more depressed and anxious all the time. I walk everywhere to save money on bus fares and keep track of how many steps I do. One day I had several appointments and by the end of the day had walked 46,000 steps when the average recommended steps are 10,000 a day. My legs were so sore and stiff by the end but I had no choice as I could not afford the bus fares.

I hardly see my friends as I can’t afford to go out. When you have no money left and you can’t afford to go out its’ so depressing and stressful. It affects relationships because people invite me but then I never attend because I can’t afford to. I can’t explain how this makes me feel to those people, not having money is a stigma and embarrassing and left feeling ashamed.

I can’t afford much needed dental treatment that would make me a thousand times more confident when I speak to people. I am so conscious about the state of my teeth damaged over time due to poor health and neglect. It’s horrible not having any leftover cash for something I can enjoy that will help me make me feel better about myself.

I can’t save any money towards move on costs or unexpected emergencies. I worry about how I will ever afford to manage my own home when it’s time for me to leave supported accommodation. My future looks financially bleak as I am not well enough to work, just getting through the day is really hard and I don’t want the added pressures of wondering what can I eat, can I afford it. I am about to start therapy soon but feel whatever small positive steps I take forward, I will always feel anxious and go backwards away from my goals as I have no control over the cost of living prices. Life feels hopeless and something drastically needs to change. I don’t want my mental health to get worse or end up ill in hospital because life is getting so stressful. Normally there would have been a time when I would not ask about the price of something, now I ask this question constantly due to the rising costs of everything. 

I’m starting therapy next week as my depression and anxiety is affecting my move on goals. This week I made contact with Peckham Pantry to volunteer and in return for 4 hour shifts they will provide me with some free food. When I do manage to have a decent meal I feel better and have more energy. I wish I felt like this all the time. 

I have started seeking advice from Citizens advice about additional benefits I may be entitled to but the forms that I have to fill are so long and intimidating it puts me off, I wish there was a simpler more user friendly way to apply for financial help.

In winter I worry about walking long distances in the cold weather and becoming more ill. I may need help getting winter clothes. I saw my GP this week about reviewing my anti-depressants as I felt my medication was not helping me it was making me worse. Nobody should have to live in constant worry, how am I supposed to get better? What is really scary is I keep hearing that the cost of living is going to get worse? When I feel really down I stop talking to even my key worker who is trying to help me. That’s how depression grips me as I have no control over my negative thoughts.”

We are facing a once in a generation cost of living crisis, which will impact the poorest the worst.

------------- 14

Mini’s story
Mini lives in our Southwark Semi Independent Housing facility, this means she only has to pay service charge, but she still has to buy food and other essentials. She used sleep rough. We spoke to her about how the Cost of Living Crisis is affecting her:

“I’m 34 years old and have no children or dependents. Life is hard and I feel I have to learn the hard way to cope with difficulties. This means I am relying on looking for extra support and meeting the right people through St Mungo’s to help me learn how to cope so I can work towards living independently.

I suffer from auditory hallucinations telling me to return to sleeping rough and right now I am learning how to manage my medication. My first thought when I wake up is to take my medication and then think do I need to spend any money today. I try very hard not to spend money every day. 

I receive £334.99 Universal Credit a month, I prefer to be paid weekly as this will help me budget better. My main expenses are food, travel and rent. These days I am more aware of discounts and very careful how I spend my money.

When I applied for benefits I was shocked to see how little benefit I have to live on. If I have to travel I walk up to 20-30 minutes to save on bus fares. Due to various appointments I often spend £20 a month topping my oyster card.

I tend to make sandwiches more and only do food shopping 1-2 times a week. I cook fish, chicken soup, stew or pasta as these are the cheapest foods I can cook. I watch cooking programmes to know how to prepare cheaper simple meals. I used to work in a steak restaurant but due to my mental health had to stop and I miss eating meat where I was appreciative of good food.

I have had to rely on grants and vouchers to get clothes. I don’t have a bank account so currently my UC is paid in vouchers. One day I would like to be well enough to work again as I miss going to the cinema and theatre.

My thoughts about winter are is that I definitely need long sleeved tops, jumpers and a winter coat which I can’t afford, my key worker has informed me I may be eligible to apply for a clothing grant.

My health would have got worse had I not moved to supported accommodation and I am slowly learning about the different types of support available to me which I was not aware of. I feel lucky that right now I am living in supported accommodation as I only have to pay service charge.”

We are facing a once in a generation cost of living crisis, which will impact the poorest the worst.

--------------- 15 

Lee’s Story
Lee is 55 and lives at Hilldrop, one of our specialist care services for people who have experienced homelessness.

Before being supported by St Mungo’s, Lee slept rough and struggled to find food.

 

“It had its ups and its downs, good days and bad days. When the weather was good it was tolerable but when it snowed or there was torrential rain, getting dry was a real difficulty, waking up in the sleeping bag all wet. You just have to sit there, it’s all you can do.

It’s hard work walking past restaurants and people are eating while you’re starving, you’ve had nothing to eat for three days. I used to get handouts sometimes. On a Sunday there was one in Waterloo, they’d give you mince and potatoes. That was good. But some of the places I didn’t like to go to. People can get really nasty over food, fighting over it.”

 

He was later supported by St Mungo’s Tenancy Sustainment Team, who tried to help him maintain his own flat. But he struggled to look after himself, and needed more support.

 

“I’ve been off the streets for a couple of years now. I had my own flat until things got on top of me. I got depressed, really depressed. There were all the bills and I didn’t know what to do with them. I wasn’t eating or sleeping, just getting as many drugs inside me as I could, it was all I was living for.”

 

Lee struggled to feed himself, and had frequent hospitalisations. He knew he needed more support, and was then referred to the Hilldrop team.

He came to Hilldrop after being in hospital after a fall, caused by tremors in his arms and legs. He said just before the fall, he had been struggling to eat.

 

“I ended up in hospital in a bad way. I was really ill. I didn’t realise how sick I was until they told me. I slipped into a coma. I was in hospital for two and a half months learning how to walk again, getting the energy to walk.”

 

Since being at Hilldrop his health has really improved and he hasn’t needed any more hospitalisations. He’s also managed to recover from his drug addiction.

 

“I’m stable now. I’m not doing drugs so my health has improved. I’m eating and sleeping more regularly. It’s a relief to know I’ve got somewhere stable. I’ve got support and help if I need it.

My medication, I didn’t take it before I came here. That’s how I managed my medication before, I didn’t take it. Just drugs, it was just a waste of everything. Staff here looking after my medication is a god-send for me.”

 

His eating has also improved, as he now has people to prepare his meals, and make sure he’s eating enough.

 

“Having food now means a hell of a lot to me. I’m not a big eater but it’s all provided. We’ve got a good cook, good food. She looks after us. I’m not quite as scrawny now.”

------------------ 16

Patrick’s Story 
It's not okay to be homeless. I don't care what people say, but to be really without a place in the world, it's not okay.

My name is Patrick, and I've experienced sleeping rough and homelessness in Melbourne, predominantly, but also in other parts of Australia. My life changed today, away from that.

The first thing I really experienced was various stages throughout my life. At times, when I was 22 or younger, it wasn't as important, but when it really hit home, I was much older. I was just turned 50 and it was very difficult and incredibly challenging.

The last period of my life before homelessness, I was working late at night in a nightclub area to look after young people who had overindulged. I injured my leg and my back, which led to some issues with a relapse in substance use and then homelessness.

When you don't have a home, there's just nothing. There are no day-to-day activities that make sense because there's nowhere to do them and nowhere to go back to. It took away all my passion for life, which I never thought would happen.

I don't think we were meant to live in urban areas like that, setting up little nooks and crannies in buildings. It changed the way I reacted to so many things, without my knowing.

The help that ended my homelessness was connection. Talking to somebody who had both the ability and the interest and the commitment to help changed everything. I think he said, "You're able to live here. You're able to live with us." Getting up in the mornings and going out from a place is a great feeling. Being in my home and being in my community, which it has become, I've been able to have long periods of stable health and living, long periods of connection to family.

It's so obvious to me now, being part of a community, how important it is for poor communities to pick up the slack. Melbourne zero homelessness is possible.

--------------------- 17

Read Sydney's story here: 

Nobody wants to sleep on the streets. Who wants to sleep on the streets, you know? I don't mean it in the wrong way, but when you're out on the streets, you're on the bottom of the ladder. It start's at the top, doesn't start at the bottom. People on the bottom can't change, because the top won't change. My name is Sydney from Melbourne.

Before I even breathed a breath of air, I was an addict because my mum was a heroin addict. So I already had problems at the start of my life. He was very strict with me, my old man. He put me through a private school. He got me tutors and shit, so I did really well at school. I just sort of... went my own way, you know. I moved out at home at a young age, at 15. I got involved in a serious assault, and... Yeah, and... I went to jail for five years. Yeah, that cost me a bit of my time and life. The prison will always provide you two nights accommodation, at least. They'll provide you a few nights accommodation. and go, "Here you go. I've helped you out. The rest is up to you." And I am appreciative of that. You've got to be appreciative for every little win you get. Every little win you get out there counts.

I very rarely slept on the street - like on the sidewalk. I tried to have a spot where I could go that wasn't in public view. Yeah, it is a little bit of pride. "Remember Sydney from school? He's sleeping on the street". Not so much that. It's just... I don't know. I didn't want people to have the opportunity to look down on me. I met this Aboriginal fella. He told me how he's going to try to help all the brothers out. He had all these big plans. And he was doing it too. He goes - "The only time I've ever looked down on someone... ... is when I'm giving them a hand up." And that's when he picked me up. He goes, "Come on, bro." We went and got a feed. He gave me some money. He said, "I wish I could take you home, but I can't." I said, "I'm right."

A lot of people are just in a bad rut. What I'm going through now, I'm in a rut. And some people just stay in that rut longer than others. My life's an open book. And I'm like that because I've walked down the... I've walked the hard line. I want to use my experiences and stuff to possibly help other people. They're going through the same struggles.

-------------- 18

Beth’s Story 
 I remember looking up at apartment buildings and looking into the windows of apartments and wondering who lived there and wondering where their life was like, always wanting to be in those apartments rather than on a corner or literally in a gutter sleeping.

Hi, I'm Beth. I'm 25 and I experienced homelessness in Melbourne for three years.

I used to do modeling and pageants but now I'm gonna be a mum, so I'm getting ready for that.

The experience for homelessness happened very quickly and I didn't realize it was happening around me at all.

I experienced sleeping rough for I think nine months consecutively, in the CBD, which is rough. That is very rough.

So I was sleeping in car parks or if I was brave enough alleyways, but there's only so many places in the CBD that you can sort of hide yourself and be safe. I'm such a small girl and had large amounts of luggage, suitcases full of clothes and everything had accumulated over time.

I had private rentals sort of on and off. They were taken away from me and I was evicted due to my friends at the time not behaving as they should have been.

I was living in these private rentals for three months or four months, or maybe even two weeks. And the last one that I had, I had planned to stay in for 12 months and the person I was living with didn't pay their share of the rent, so...evicted.

The week that I got evicted, I found out I was pregnant. So I had a choice to make a big one, and I realized that there was something more important than me coming into this world and I needed to be sort of a world for that thing. And so I called launch housing and I said, "Hey, I've called before. I've tried to get help from you before this time, though. It's not just me that needs help."

I think it's important that Melburnians understand the stigma attached to it is it's wild. It's  not necessarily the person, it's the circumstances that you're faced with. So it's just disappointing that homelessness is just sort of placed in one scale when there's so much going on to cause that.

Now I've been living in my apartment for three months, but I have been on this journey for eight. And in that time I have gotten clean. I've sought help from mental health professionals.  I'm on a lot of vitamins, pregnancy vitamins. So I'm giving my body sort of a chance to, for the first time ever, just sort of stop, do what it's meant to do, give my head a chance to be what it's mean to be.

Now that I've got stability, I can actually maintain all of that.

------------- 19

Alex’s Story 
 I'd actually gotten to the point of just going, this is my life now. I will die on these streets eventually.

Hi, I'm Alex, and I've had lived experience of homelessness in Melbourne.

I was born in Scotland, moved over to Australia when I was five. I love Australia, but I'm very sort of European in a lot of ways. 

I grew up in a small country town, but even as a kid I always wanted to move down to Melbourne because Melbourne's a very European city. So soon as I could, I did.

My life had already become a bit of a struggle. I have always dealt with mental health issues of anxiety and depression.

I came down and I was staying in a backpackers, with the thought of doing some art but was obviously running low on money straight away. Art supplies are expensive and I had no friends to turn to, and that's where it led then to eventually having no cash... and the first time hitting the streets, and sleeping rough.

I was scared out of my mind...The choice of sleeping on a very busy street in the center of Melbourne that was always lit and there was always people walking around, was because I just figured if something happens, hopefully maybe somebody will help in some way. 

I didn't sleep. I was just lying there nervous. Very, very cold. It was the wintertime here in Melbourne. I think people forget how cold it is at three in the morning on the streets of Melbourne in winter.

The time was 10 years altogether, off and on. But the last period was four years straight living on the streets until finally getting off.

It was walking into emergency room of the Royal Melbourne Hospital, and first time ever in my life, asking for help which led me to being connected with a case worker at Launch Housing.

They got me into the H2H program and it took a little while, but from there, that got me a home, got me set up again, and I've been there year now.

It is very weird. It actually took me about six months to really settle in there, feel comfortable and not nervous, and I started putting up pictures and, and frames on the wall and buying things for the house and working on the garden.

I feel safe. I don't feel like I'm ever going back to the streets anymore.

Now things have been getting just better and better at my home and in my life, as I was willing to ask for help.

I've been thinking about this a lot over the last year, about being a member of the LGBTI community.

I'm transgender, and I kept saying to people that I don't think being transgender had anything to do with me becoming homeless and living on the streets. But I've been looking back and it obviously does have a major part to do with it because again, that was part of the whole anxiety and depression of me not being myself. Feeling literally uncomfortable walking down the street because I think people are looking at me because I feel like I'm in the wrong skin.

I'm slowly becoming who I wanna be in the world, which helps with that.

I'm getting to do my art again. I feel in control of my own life again, and I feel like I have a life moving forward.

Melbourne, zero homelessness is possible. 

---------------- 20

Susan’s Story 
You hide it, because you feel ashamed...you've messed up, you've done something wrong...how could you end up homeless?

Homeless people feel that stigma, and we need to break it, and we need to give them love.

Hello, my name is Susan. I'm 52 years old. I have lived in Melbourne for over 30 years. I have two university degrees, one in Illustrative Photography and the other is in teaching from the University of Melbourne. 

My life before I became homeless was quite stable. I had a studio at home and a three-bedroom residence that I had lived in for 11 years. It was very much my home and sanctuary, and I loved it very much. 

However, an elderly relative told me they were dying, so I gave everything away, packed everything up, and moved to Tasmania. I experienced three years of extreme abuse and trauma. I was homeless in Tasmania for two months and then for seven months in Victoria and New South Wales. This happened during the lockdowns in Melbourne and Sydney. 

For the last six weeks of my homelessness, I lived in my car, which was a little bit scary. I had to figure out safe places to park, but I did have an alarm on the car, which made me feel a little safer. But it was still scary and uncomfortable. I didn't have curtains on the windows, so anyone could have looked in, and even though I had an alarm, it wouldn't have helped if someone smashed a window. 

Then I got in contact with Launch Housing and a place came up and I was offered it. It has completely changed my life in a very positive way. 

For me, a home means safety, it means I'm in control of my life and a home means that I can heal. 

Melbourne, zero homelessness is possible. 

------------- 21

Haryath’s Story 
 Hi, my name is Haryath and my daughter and I experienced homelessness in Melbourne. I'm originally from India. I have a degree, and I worked in banking for five years. I left India when I moved here with my ex-husband with the dream of a beautiful life. 

Soon after we moved, my husband became violent. I first experienced homelessness when my daughter was a baby. We had to escape the situation, but I didn't know anyone here and had no support. For two to three months, we stayed in hotels and sometimes scary motels. It was so stressful with a baby not knowing where we would be tomorrow and what might happen. 

I only had one or two sets of clothes for myself and my daughter because I didn't know the area very well, and I didn't have money to buy more for us. I would wash the set of clothes that I wasn't wearing in the bathroom sink, washing them by hand and trying to dry them inside. 

People need supportive communities to get the right help so they can feel like themselves again. Without community support, I wouldn't be here today. It was the people who never gave up on me, connecting me with the right services, that was the biggest help. 

Since finding a home, we've done so much. I have so many hopes and plans now. When I was homeless, I couldn't see my tomorrow, but now I see a good job, my daughter in a great school, and one day getting my permanent residency. 

I think people in Melbourne need to know that we are human. Homelessness is a situation and a point in time, a hard time that anyone in their life can experience. So just be kind, be supportive, and support people.

-------------------- 22

Henry's story
Just as Henry's marriage broke down, his parents became very unwell. He had to go to Nigeria to look after them, and sadly, one of them died. But when he returned home to the UK, he had nowhere to live.

“When I came back, I was homeless. It was horrible. I stayed with someone my friend knew, but it was too much for him.

“One day, he said I needed to leave immediately. My heart was palpitating. In the morning I had to leave and was roaming about from one place to another trying to get support. I went to the council, and they said it was congested. They said people with children are priority, and they are right. I couldn’t cope anymore. There were no options for me, and I didn’t know what to do.

"A friend told me about Crisis. The lady that I first met really assisted me.

“Crisis got me a B&B for a week and was talking to the council to try and get them to help. After the B&B, I was moving from one place to the next and sleeping wherever there was an opportunity for me.

“It is not good for someone to experience homelessness. It is a very traumatic experience. Whether you’re on the streets or you are staying with someone temporarily, you don’t have your freedom at all."

Henry was housed three months after he contacted Crisis and has a room in shared accommodation.

“For me, having a home is like being on top of the world. When you have a room to yourself, and you can sleep and wake up when you want, it’s everything.

“My lead worker is a professional with great humanity. Even if I had lots of questions, she would listen to me and assist me to her best means.

“Crisis is quick to assist you. They listen to your case. They assess you; they will go to any length to make sure they solve your problem for you. I believe that Crisis has people of goodwill.

"I go to IT classes at the Skylight twice a week. I can use the computer a bit and email. I’m also in the Christmas choir, I love singing.

“My hope for the future is to contribute positively to society. I like working and I like doing charity work and volunteering. It’s a very good experience. I can never forget Crisis; they are an organisation that will live with me until I die.”

------------------ 23

Stephen's story
When Stephen returned to the UK after working abroad, he couldn’t find work which meant he couldn’t get a home.

Stephen stayed with his daughter, was forced to sleep on sofas at friends’ houses and in friends’ art studios on an inflatable bed. Here, he tells his story - and how Crisis have supported him twice out of homelessness.

 

Meeting Crisis for the first time

“10 years ago, I was forced into homelessness. My teaching contract wasn’t renewed, and I couldn’t make ends meet. I struggled with my mental health and couldn’t get work.

“I was homeless and slept in phone boxes and on the streets in Islington. When I was admitted to hospital, the clinical psychologist put me in touch with Crisis and that’s when I first met the charity.

“Crisis helped me into a home, gave me my own art studio at a Crisis project and helped me get a job in Oman teaching A-level Art."

 

Returning from abroad

“I was in Oman for eight years and returned with savings. When I got back, I found it difficult to get rented accommodation.

“It was so hard to find a home to rent without having a job. One person said they would take me on, but they wanted a £10,000 deposit because I wasn't working. I applied for so many jobs. I rented a little store in Islington and tried to sell my artwork, but over two years, I didn’t have enough money to cover the essentials.

“I couldn’t believe it was happening again. And at the same time the anxiety and depression that I had experienced a long time ago, started to slowly come back.

“At this time, I was staying with my daughter and moving around between family members. I wanted to support my family as much as I could when I was sofa surfing but within a year, I had half the money I saved. It got to the stage where it was becoming more difficult to stay with my daughter and she asked me to leave.

“I went to Islington council who struggled to find anything suitable for me because there wasn’t much around, so I slept on sofas at friends’ houses and in friends’ art studios on an inflatable bed. It was about six weeks after I’d been to the council that I went back to Crisis, and my lead worker, Jeremy, helped with doctor’s appointments, got me benefits advice, and pushed the council."

 

Getting support from Crisis

“Jeremy applied to food places in the area and found a pantry in Islington, where they do fresh vegetables and other stuff. For a little while, I got back into the art classes at the Skylight and funnily enough, they still have the same table from ten years ago that they used to have in the old art room at Crisis Bermondsey project.

“Thanks to Jeremy and Crisis, I’m now in an amazing flat that is my home. I appreciate everything that Crisis has done for me.

“I'm a two-minute walk from the river Avon. I’m going to do a lot of painting and will try and get some local places to sell my art. I can also now apply for other things and maybe even get a little part time job.

"Now I feel safe, I’ve got a home and I’m able to focus on having some sort of future. And that's important for anyone because it's your dignity.

“Rents are going up, bills are high and there are lots of other pressures. It’s important that people know about these situations and that there are a lot of people in this situation right now.”

------------------- 24

Gaz's story

Donating to our Crisis at Christmas appeal can help someone like Gaz start to build their life beyond homelessness. Here's his story...

Gaz's experiences of homelessness
“I’ve always been a positive person and helped other people. Always had a caring nature but I had a tough childhood. But that’s given me the skills and the attributes to be of use now. My mum was deaf from birth, and she had schizophrenia. I left with my dad when I was four. And my dad was an alcoholic, we were in bedsits, so I had experience of not having housing even back then.

“I got arrested in 2013 but just previously, I was on holiday in Thailand. After three days, I had a cardiac arrest, my lungs stopped which made my heart stop. But this is because I didn’t love myself; I had no therapy for my trauma since childhood.

“When I got arrested three months later, I wanted to work hard to better myself. I created a structure, and I was away from that harmful lifestyle. But then I had abandonment issues which I didn’t know at the time; I realised when I had therapy. When I was 38, I had a broken heart from a failed relationship, and I was still on probation. But when the first lockdown happened, I moved into a house share where my half-brother was in the room next door. He is lovely but I just started giving up. I was having a mental breakdown.

“I felt so much pressure and my life just spiralled out of control.”

Gaz's journey to Crisis
“One day, I decided to leave that life. I visited the soup kitchen because I didn’t have any money and became homeless. As soon as you run out of money, that’s it; that’s how much your life can change in one day. I remember walking down the road, a hot day, and seeing these happy people walking past and all your thoughts start going back to your childhood, where did it go wrong. That’s when I went to the library and found a leaflet about Crisis.

"I thought I’d give it a go and I didn’t know what I was going to be walking into. It was just amazing. It was life-changing, and from the minute I walked in and sat down, met the receptionist and then sat down for a bit, I could just sense that this was just a different vibe. It was unlike any other organisation or anything I’ve been to in my whole life. There was just a real warm, caring vibe and it was just amazing, yes, and changed my life.

"Then I met my lead worker, and she was absolutely amazing. It was all about what she could do to help me progress, what she could do to help my situation, is there anything that I need. And then she told me about all the classes and stuff that they do here, and I just got involved in everything and just fell in love with the place.

“Crisis helped me have a structure instead of going mad and being out on the street. I don’t know what I would have done without them. Crisis gave me all the resources, got a place in a hostel.

“It’s not rocket science. If you haven’t got a roof over your head, it’s going to be difficult to progress in life.

“Crisis also helped me get my medication. There’s a doctor drop-in on Tuesdays. I’ve been with Crisis nearly 18 months now and I’ve seen people get their lives transformed.

“There’s just no negativity at Crisis. I’m even starting to look towards pursuing some of my dreams because of the foundation that these people have given me. And I’ve done some things for Crisis which I didn’t think I’d be able to do, like talk to 200 people online for Lloyds, or reading at the Carol service to 500 people.

“I also got the support from Kaitlyn, my lead worker, she’s always telling me how proud she is.

“My first night at my own flat, I had blow-up beds. Crisis got me blow-up beds because we were waiting for my furniture pack to come, which Crisis and Kaitlyn sorted out as well. I have nice neighbours and we have our own little Whatsapp group. We ask whose turn is it to do the bins. 

“We shouldn’t live in a world where you can’t have a home; everyone should have a home."

Gaz's experiences of Crisis at Christmas
For Crisis at Christmas in 2023, Gaz was a keen volunteer, and he wrote the foreword for the Christmas magazine. He also gave a speech at the Cathedral during the Christmas carol service.

“This is my second Crisis at Christmas. Last Crisis at Christmas, I did absolutely everything. I did art, where we made tote bags and t-shirts, and I’ve done the sing-alongs, I’ve done the quizzes, the bingo. Just absolutely everything. I volunteered on Christmas Day and Boxing Day.

“I’ve met some amazing people and getting involved with everything at Christmas with Crisis made my Christmas. You know, Christmas is hard for some people, and especially hard last year and will be again this year. But the stuff that you do with Crisis takes your mind off everything and you feel part of a nice, caring, warm community.

“I’ve been looking forward to Crisis at Christmas because I like Christmas anyway. It was rubbish when I was little. Now I’m older, I can make my own Christmas, and I just like the vibe. As soon as it was getting near Christmas, I was onto Rachel and saying, “I want to volunteer,” and, “when’s the timetable coming out?”

“My favourite part of Crisis so far this year is just sharing the experience with the other members and seeing them throughout the year. Seeing their journey and seeing what we’re all getting out of it, due to Crisis and what they deliver and their ethos and what they bring at Christmas. It’s just been nice seeing people that have been through a real hard time with a smile on their face.

“The supporters and the donors, their money is going to good use. It’s changing people’s lives."

-------------- 25

Simon's story
Simon was living in his childhood home with his Mum, but when she died, the landlord increased the rent from £127 per week to £1,450 per month. When Simon struggled to keep up with the rent, he was evicted. He tells his story.
 

“I was working as a care and support worker, and I had challenges at work. I was being bullied at work, and I had a breakdown. I was really struggling, and at the time, my mum was struggling because she was in her 90s. So, we agreed that it would be better if I moved back in. I could support her, and it would give me a safe space, because of my mental health struggles.
 

"My parents had moved into the house just after the Second World War started. It was a rented property. It had been a family home for me and my siblings and always been a safe space.
 

"When she died, I informed the landlord, as you should do, that I wanted to take over the tenancy. I got a letter back from the landlord saying, 'Yes, you can stay, but your rent’s going up.' On benefits, I couldn’t afford the increase in rent from £127 per week to £1,450 per month. Universal Credit pay £524.99 a month which isn’t enough to cover the cost of living.
 

"I saw a Crisis advert, and I thought, 'I’ll give them a ring'. I went in, had my initial interview, and they put me onto Angela.
 

"Angela is phenomenal. She's been through all the paperwork, all the texts, all the emails, all the letters. She's supported me with applications. If the council offered me a place that wasn’t appropriate, Angela would contact them and say, 'Look, this isn’t appropriate because…'
 

"Everyone at the Birmingham Skylight has gone above and beyond. Crisis has been amazing. I've finally found a social home that is suitable.
 

"Working with Crisis, I realised that it wasn't just me. There are thousands of people out there in a similar situation.
 

"The Government needs to take action. More needs to be done to help private tenants. We need to prioritise building social housing."

------------- 26

Charlotte's story

Donating to our Crisis at Christmas appeal can help someone like Charlotte start to build their life beyond homelessness. Here's her story...

Charlotte's experiences of homelessness
Charlotte moved to the UK from Trinidad and Tobago over 20 years ago, and was living in temporary accommodation when Crisis first supported her. Jessica, her Crisis coach, helped her to find a new home and apply for funding to start a business. She now owns a successful food business in Edinburgh serving Caribbean vegan cuisine.

“My mum had cancer. We were all living in the same house with her, just to support her. After she passed, they said we had to leave the house as they’re going to sell it. It was privately rented. I was staying with my older sister, but my life had stalled. I didn’t realise how much I was still grieving. And then, when I had to leave, I went into temporary accommodation.

“My daughter was moving with me from place to place. Then they told me that I’d missed a message to say I’d got a council place. My phone was broken at the time, but they didn’t know, so they were still sending me messages.”

Discovering Crisis
Charlotte was introduced to Crisis. “First time entering Crisis, I’ve felt at ease. They were very friendly. I think the one thing I remember feeling is not feeling like I’m being ‘put down’.

“My first day at Crisis was helpful. I’m trying to find the right words because “helpful” is not enough as it was so much more than help. There was no judging. It was just a feeling of, “You’re a human being going through a situation and we’re here to help you,” and that was it. They didn’t care what the situation – it didn’t feel like they cared what the situation was or whatever, it was just, you’re in a moment and you’re having a moment. This is not you. At least I felt that they understood that this wasn’t me, and I just needed some help to come out of this situation that I was forced into.

“They helped me with paperwork and helped me to get out of that situation. They provided a deposit for my new home, and it just took a weight off my shoulders.

Charlotte told her Crisis coach, Jessica, that she wanted to start a business. Jessica supported her to apply for a Changing Lives grant. “I had to build a business plan, have an idea of where I wanted to go, what I’d be spending and stuff like that. I was given £1,500. That money has allowed me to set everything up."

Setting up a business
Jessica has been by Charlotte’s side as she’s developed her business. “She’s helped me to plan where to go next. She supported me without making decisions for me. 

“I do smoothies and street food, but it’s all really healthy. I make marinade sauces too, like the pepper sauce I’m just bringing out. Everything is homemade.
Everything’s vegan, everything’s fresh. We do food for festivals. We do food for birthdays, and we do all different occasions. Caribbean food is often seen as jerk chicken and a curry, so it’s like if you don’t have that on the menu, then you’re not true Caribbean. I want to show that vegan food can be just as tasty.

“For the future, I am hoping to get my sauces in grocery stores like Asda and Tesco. Having my own business means security. It’s given me the opportunity to try something.

"Because of the grant and the programme, I opened up my eyes to see that there’s so many different levels or avenues that this business can go into. So instead of being closed off, I’m now wide open to accepting things. It’s taught me to come out of my shell and have a bit more faith in myself."

Now Charlotte is housed in the privately rented sector. “My home is finally home. When I get in, I literally close the door, I take a deep breath, and it’s just home. I haven’t had that feeling in a long time. I’m trying not to let the business overtake the house – but at least now I have the space to cook!”

Charlotte's experiences of Crisis at Christmas
Charlotte returned to Crisis for Christmas 2023 to prepare food for our Christmas guests.

"The atmosphere during Christmas was amazing. I didn’t expect to be so full on in a good way. For this Christmas, I’m going to try and visit Crisis again."

-------------- 27

Gail's story.
Meet Gail, Crisis supporter and former volunteer.

My name is Gail, I was born and raised in Guyana and moved to the USA for graduate school. Then in 2011, I moved to the UK with my husband. I now work in immigration compliance. I experienced housing insecurity when I was younger and can empathise with anyone facing a similar situation.

Homelessness has always been an issue I’ve cared about.

Growing up in Guyana, I experienced a period of housing and food insecurity. And I’ve seen first-hand the challenges people face when they can’t rely on a roof over their head. Those memories have always stayed with me.

When I first moved to the UK, I hadn’t expected housing insecurity and homelessness to be such a big problem. In a country like Britain, with all the support systems available, I was surprised at the extent of the issue. It certainly wasn’t the impression I’d got from the television. And of course, the weather we have here in the UK. The cold and wet makes being without a home so much more challenging for people.

Charitable causes are important to me and my husband. We value empathy and kindness for others and believe you don’t have to be wealthy to leave something to those who need it. For me, it’s important to help in whatever way I can.

Not long after we came to the UK, we heard about Crisis at Christmas through the Big Issue and decided we should volunteer. It was such an incredible experience. We met lots of wonderful people and continued volunteering for a number of years before my husband became ill, and it was no longer possible.

I like the way Crisis supports and empowers people so they can rebuild their lives. When I was no longer able to volunteer, I continued donating now and then. Leaving a gift in my Will was another way I knew I could make a difference.

Homelessness is a complex issue, but it comes down to the fairness of our society.

There are so many reasons someone could find themselves without a home – the pressures of high rent, low wages, relationship breakdown, mental health problems, addiction – and there isn’t a simple answer.

And now, with the cost of living crisis, even more people are under pressure. When renting privately is so precarious even for working people, we need more protection for people living in insecure accommodation. And more support to help people who have lost their homes to get back on their feet quickly. I know that Crisis are campaigning for the policies that will prevent homelessness – to me that’s the kind of long-term solution we desperately need.

I hope my gift to Crisis will help them continue supporting the people who need it most. I’ve seen how hard it can be to experience housing insecurity and I want to make a difference for someone who might one day find themselves in that situation.

-------------- 28

Con's story

Donating to our Crisis at Christmas appeal can help someone like Con start to build their life beyond homelessness. Here's his story...

Con came to Crisis as a guest during Crisis at Christmas in December 2015 and stayed in one of Crisis’ hotels. Nine years later, Con has been a homeowner for over a year-and-a-half. He has also been a manager of a service, housing homeless people and prison leavers. In 2023, using his personal experience, knowledge, and skills, he volunteered for four shifts at a hotel in Aldgate in London as a general advice volunteer.

Con's experiences of homelessness
“After university I got a job in marketing, and after that I worked as a buyer at a furniture company. I then worked in the automotive industry for 18 years, in project management. I had a very good salary – but, by then, I struggled with substance abuse.  In 2006, my relationship with my long-term partner broke down and I lost my job."

In 2013, he started staying at his friend’s house, until his friend forced him to leave. In 2015, he was forced into homelessness.

“I was sleeping rough on the streets in London. I had to move around between
different neighbourhoods. The most frightening thing was that I started to get used to being homeless. When I started rough sleeping, I registered as homeless with my council, but I couldn’t prove that I’d been in the borough long enough to get any support. I didn't have a rental agreement to show them, to prove my connection to the area, as I’d been renting from a friend. I got legal aid and challenged the council’s decision, but after two years it ended with no resolution.”

Volunteering at Crisis at Christmas - while experiencing homelessness
"The first time I volunteered at a Crisis at Christmas centre in 2015, I was actually still rough sleeping. The other volunteers didn’t know my situation, I was really good at hiding it.

“That first Christmas in 2015, can you imagine what my life was like? Sleeping rough on the streets in December, in the freezing cold, and then going to the day centre where I was a guest and having a warm shower and something to eat. And then going to my late shift at Crisis at Christmas, and then leaving there and going back to sleep on the street.

“That Crisis at Christmas in 2015 was pivotal in turning my life around. I felt safe doing those shifts. With the other volunteers, I felt like this was my family. I’d never seen a group of people give so much of themselves.

"In 2022, I was an advisor to the manager at Camden day centre. And they changed the model of it for 2023, so I just ended up as a general advice volunteer, and I was at Aldgate Hotel."

Con's journey with Crisis
In January 2016, Con visited the London Crisis Skylight centre and when he first walked in, a lead worker called Dan took him in. He was then assigned a progression coach, Sarah, who supported him to get a place in an emergency winter shelter. He received support in overcoming his substance use.

"I then became a Crisis member for two years. I managed to get housed in some supported accommodation provided. But when I left there, I was still able to access
support through Crisis, and they paid my deposit. I had to move into a private-rented studio.

“My Crisis housing coach helped me find a room to rent privately. She helped me feel confident about the process. I was scared about how to manage benefits and rent, and I’d been burying my head in the sand until then. My job coach helped me with CV workshops and motivation workshops. I started to come out of myself, and to get job interviews. I slowly became more independent, and I needed to check in with my coach less and less.

“I worked with Crisis for about two years, I was attending their courses. And I started volunteering at a refugee centre in 2016 May, and then I started volunteering at St Giles Trust. And I did an NVQ Level Three in Advice and Guidance, and I did an NVQ Level Three – One, Two and Three – in Interpreting, because I’m a linguist.

“People can support Crisis in a number of ways, they can donate time; they can donate clothing; they can donate financially.

"When you think when I came as a guest of Crisis in December 2015, and I’ve now been a home-owner for over a year-and-a-half, or about a year-and-a-half – and you know, I was a manager of a service, housing homeless people and prison leavers; quite a journey, isn’t it?”

------------- 29

Zahra's story
After Zahra's marriage broke down, she was placed into a hotel with her children as part of her local authority's homelessness procedure. The hotel was infested with bedbugs and cockroaches which prompted Zahra to contact Crisis. With the help of her leadworker, Sophie, Zahra and her family were able to make a new start and leave homelessness behind for good. Zahra shares her story.

"I was told going into the hotel is what happens when you go through the homeless procedure. It wasn't going into the hotel that was the issue for me, it was the conditions there. On the first day, we noticed a cockroach and they moved us. Then a couple of days later we noticed another one.

"I started to realise it's not just one room, it’s the whole hotel.

"One of the rooms we went into had bedbugs. I literally ended up getting completely attacked. I had an allergic reaction and my whole body broke out in massive red blotches.

"My daughter got bit on her face and that really upset me because she had to go to school. She had other bites on her and I just felt terrible.

"They started to affect me how I never thought a bug would. I started to itch. My eyes started playing tricks on me. It made me feel dirty. And it really affected my daughter too. It's not very nice to live in that environment.

"We didn't get the support we needed from the council or the hotel manager. After six months or so at the hotel, this is what pushed me to contact Crisis.

“I contacted Crisis because I was feeling a little bit lost and extremely frustrated at constant reoccurring situations within where I was. I felt like, due to the fact I didn’t really know Birmingham that well, it would be good to have someone who maybe was more accustomed to the council or even the whole homeless process or families, as well as my situation. Having a marital breakdown was already quite difficult.

“I felt like I needed support in a few different areas. My first interaction with Crisis was a little nerve-racking. It’s always difficult explaining your situation to people.

"Sophie was assigned as my lead worker and she was lovely. I was nervous when we had our first meeting but she was really relaxed. She encouraged me to relax. We just talked through some of the issues I was having.

"She sent quite a few emails to the temporary housing officer, and she basically worked like an advocate. And I felt it was almost like a support network.

“Sophie was also supporting me about contacting my MP, which I did.

“I’ve just moved into rented accommodation so my main focus right now is just getting myself a little bit organised. It is a very nice home. I've been unpacking, and organising the children’s room. I’m also doing a lot of cleaning!

“The support that Crisis offers is very good. I love the fact that it’s holistic so it’s not just saying, “We’re going to help you with your housing,” they also support you with education, wellbeing and your health.

"I would like people to know that it will get better.”

------------------ 30

Pete's story
“I grew up with my two sisters, my mum and dad and my brother. I was very lucky to receive an amazing education and always wanted to be a footballer. But everything changed when my family’s home got repossessed. I was 18 and not classed as a dependant, so I was forced into homelessness. 

 

“It was a real shock, but as a teenager I didn’t really think of myself as homeless. I just needed a sofa to sleep on. I worked in retail and as a chef for many years. In 2012 I went to university. When I graduated, I built a career in furniture retail and became a Showroom Manager.  

 

“I saved a deposit and bought my first house which was amazing. I got married and in 2018, we had our son. Things were looking good, until lockdown when our relationship broke down and I lost my job.  

 

“I was struggling financially and had so many plates in the air. My mental health really suffered, and I was hospitalised. The only thing that kept me going was the thought of my son. But then when I was released, I came home to an eviction notice. I was homeless again. 

 

“That’s when a friend suggested Crisis. They were brilliant. They gave me housing advice and helped me access mental health support. I’ve got a flat now and I’m focusing on being the best dad I can be. That’s why Crisis is so important. They’re working on the root causes of homelessness so that the next generation don’t have to go through what I did.  

 

“Crisis doesn’t overwhelm you. Their support enables you to make the changes you need for yourself.  

 

“Slowly I’m working on myself and my life. I love football, and now play for FC Equalise which is all about increasing participation.” 